Well, the Venetians are taking a few of these phrases.
And I'll just mention a few of these terms, if I may.
In a word which is very often used in the Welsh is top,
which is what I am for being up here.
That means being silly.
Oh, I've taken a real fancy to her, they go, and...
She was out there like a winky.
These are terms which they use,
and of course you have to understand these connotations.
For example, it's the last thing I am now,
but when somebody is excited, they say,
Oh, he's over the moon, he is.
Ha!
Shukum rynchid.
A real blemmer.
Waretig, waretig.
We should be fair play in Welsh.
These are words which cover the language here,
catryl and gwa'dab and all the rest of it.
The one with the kind of term which would...
One of the ones which I really take a fancy to is that
the kind of thing when somebody asks you,
Oh, how's your sister?
Oh, very poor.
She's under the doctor, she is.
Ha!
It strikes me as a sure case of malpractice, eh?
When a little boy was asked why he...
He was given some seeds by his teacher,
and he was asked where he planted them, he says,
Oh, I planted them down my gran's back.
Ha!
This is not a reference to some senior citizens or manomy folks,
it means that he's talking about in the backyard,
but this is the kind of language they have.
God knows what happens when the local council comes and digs up gran's front.
Ha!
There is...
There's also, you know, in the...
There's a lovely...
The language has got some lovely Welsh words in it.
I wonder how many of you here remember the word, kuch?
Kuch.
Kuch in Wales, in South Wales particularly, has four delightful meanings,
as John Edwards goes to some pains to explain in his tape.
He says, kuch under...
Kuch, do you remember the kuch under the star?
Where you used to store stuff?
There's a lot of heads, not in a way, folks.
There's the kuch it away, keep it safe.
I used to say to the dog, remember, she was a faithful dog, kuch!
And the dog would come to heel.
But you know, the most beautiful kuch of all
was when you used to kuch up to your man.
Back in Wales, if you thought you were going to love folks,
you don't know what you've missed.
In Wales, traditionally, I remember as a child,
whenever I used to fall and graze my knees,
I used to come and kuch up to me gran.
And kuching up to my gran meant you'd put in a shawl
and wrapped around, and there you were.
Away from the world's worries and cares,
there you were, kuched up to your gran.
Isn't that marvelous, wasn't it, eh?
That's why we've always grown up with a smile on our face.
I must admit, when I got on into little life,
I learned that you could kuch at other things too.
There's also an aspect of wanglish,
which is the gross overuse of a word.
And one word which is grossly overused in Wales, of course, is tidy.
A conversation which John Edwards gives in his tapes is of this nature.
Or another one which he gives as well is but a gal being asked,
Tidy fellow, turn his hand to anything.
Makes the mind a bottle of everything.
But I'd like to break away from wanglish
because I'm of that peripheral region.
My ancestors actually came from, my father and mother came from Carmarthenshire.
And I was brought up to speak Welsh.
In actual fact, I was hospitalized when I was six in Cardiff.
I was there to find a nurse to translate from me because I couldn't speak in English.
It's true, sorry, it's true.
It's at the end of the part of Wales where I come from.
I was born in a farm in North of Swansea.
I was born in Swansea.
You've almost got enough of a rugby side there, eh?
Just an aside before I come to the last things that I could do.
The farm we had, another aspect of Wales,
is that I was born in Cwm Cille Farm and our name was Thomas.
And therefore we went, Thomas Cwm Cille.
But yeah, all around us was Thomas Maes de Mawr,
Thomas Blank Cille, Thomas Fon de Vidman,
Thomas Ardors, Thomas Gwysigrond, Thomas Gwysidur,
Thomas Gwysigrond as well.
And you know, the incurious thing was, and really it's true honestly,
not one of us was interrelated and yet we were all Thomas'
and really it's quite phenomenal.
Another local personage of Sir Stephen Wales,
actually a considerable Stephen Wales,
which we had was from a small village where I went to school,
Blackman Park, and he actually took his name,
and this will give you the clue of what we were referring to,
he actually took his name from the chapel where we went to as kids,
and to Croes.
Croes Williams was a local man, in actual fact his brother
used to repair the shoes for us, Thomas Williams the cleaver was a fellow.
And to conclude here, I don't know, maybe Bob would ask me later to come up
and do a Wenglish tale for you, but I don't know,
depends how much of that rain year I get in the Alba.
I do have one prepared, maybe later on.
But Croes Williams wrote many lovely delightful poems,
and I'd just like to finish by reading one of them,
it's called William Treveen,
and it refers to of course the passage in time of a lot of things in Wales,
as there are in the West I suppose.
I hope that he worked in Bali, Akanmali, Malirtele, and Treveen, till then.